# Event-based locations

Event-based locations are locations that, rather than being associated with a
statically placed item in the world, are associated with the occurence of some
event during gameplay. They are identifiable by a `pos` field that, rather than
having the usual form of `[map,x,y,z]`, is instead `[map,"event type",...]`,
where the tail fields depend on the event.

## `[map,"exit"]`
## `[map,"exit",destination]`
## `[map,"event","exit"]` (legacy)

This location does not exist in the logic file; the apworld creates one of these
implicitly for every map (or cluster). It does, however, exist in the tuning
file. This location is checked when the player exits the map (in the normal
manner, not by loading a game or using the levelport menu).

At present the exit location always contains a clear token. There are plans to
track level clear status separately and allow items to be randomized into the
level exit.

The last form was used in tuning files generated by older versions and is no
longer supported, but can easily by converted to the new format just by deleting
`"event",` from it.

## `[map,"secret","sector",id]`
## `[map,"secret","tid",id]`

This location is defined in the logic file, using an AP-SECRET message (which
contains only the position) rather than an AP-ITEM. This location is checked
when the corresponding secret is discovered by the player. The first form
associates the location with a secret sector; the second form with the
`SecretTrigger` item with the given TID. (`+COUNTSECRET` actors are not
currently supported.)

## `[map,"spawn",n,typename]`
## `[map,"spawn",n,typename,x,y,z]`
## `[map,"spawn",n,typename,x,y,z,r]`

This location is triggered by the spawning of a specific actor at runtime. The
`typename` denotes the actor. `n` is the number of spawns to turn into
locations. If this is more than one, multiple locations will be created numbered
1 through `n` inclusive. In the tuning file, `n` corresponds to the specific
number that was checked.

The second form gives a precise position at which the actor must spawn; spawns
in other locations are ignored. This is useful for items spawned by scripts.

The third form gives a position and a radius, which is useful for items that
spawn as death drops, e.g. from minibosses.

The location will not be automatically checked when the item spawns; rather, the
item will be replaced with a normal check that the player must then collect.

### Implementation

We define various subtypes of `Location` in zscript, with their own constructors,
that know how to handle their events. In the generated zscript, the in-apworld
`DoomLocation` generates (or rather, asks its position to generate) a zscript
snippet constructing the appropriate type of `Location`.

At registration time, the `Region` asks each location if it is event-based, and
if so, appends it to a separate list of event-based locations (in addition to
normal location registration behaviour).

On level entry, it calls `OnLevelEntry(true)` on each of these; on level reopen,
it calls `OnLevelEntry(false)`. On actionable events, it calls
`CheckEvent(event_type, destination, thing)`, where:

- `event_type` is one of "exit", "secret", or "spawn"
- `destination` is the exit destination, for "exit" events (else "")
- `thing` is the newly spawned item, for "spawn" events (else null)

Locations that don't care about that event ignore it. Locations that do can act
on it, by, e.g., immediately calling `CheckLocation` (exit), or by checking the
level sector list and calling `CheckLocation` if discovered (secret), or by
comparing the `thing` and the number of times the event has fired to the event
parameters (spawn).

We may, in the future, want to add a way for locations to report what kind of
event they're interested in, and, for spawn events, maybe what actor type, so
that we don't dispatch events that no location is interested in; but at least
initially the number of EBLs per map is expected to be low enough that this is
not an issue.
